v4.1 changelog (#155)
broadinstitute/gnomad-blog: content/changelog/2024-04-gnomad-v4-1-updates.md

---
title: gnomAD v4.1 updates
date: "2024-04-26"
order: 1
---

# TODO: update date to actual release date (current date is holder)

> This changelog entry discusses additional smaller updates to gnomAD added with the v4.1 release that were not discussed in the [blog post](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024-04-gnomad-v4-1/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This changelog entry discusses smaller updates to gnomAD added with the v4.1 release that were not discussed in the [blog post](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024-04-gnomad-v4-1/).
```
Style choice but "additional...added" seemed redundant

Reviewer: Style choice but "additional...added" seemed redundant

> This changelog entry discusses additional smaller updates to gnomAD added with the v4.1 release that were not discussed in the [blog post](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024-04-gnomad-v4-1/).

Reviewer: Or maybe
```suggestion
This changelog entry discusses additional smaller updates to gnomAD as part of the v4.1 release that were not discussed in the [blog post](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024-04-gnomad-v4-1/).
```

<!-- end_excerpt -->

> As part of gnomAD v4.1, we have added the following new features:

Reviewer: Oops, maybe disregard my second suggestion that uses "As part of"

> - Browser display of non-UK Biobank (UKB) subset of gnomAD v4 exomes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Browser display of non-UK Biobank (non-UKB) subset of gnomAD v4 exomes
```
To align with the browser dropdown text

- Supplementary files containing REVEL scores for variants in 2,414 transcripts that weren't scored in the v4.0 release
- New joint exome + genome frequency resources with statistical tests flagging variants with [discrepant frequencies](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/help/combined-freq-stats)

We have also updated the following features:
- Gene constraint metrics
- Exome copy number variants
- Genome structural variants
- [Stats page](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/stats)

### Browser display of non-UK Biobank subset

> As part of gnomAD v4.1, we have exposed the non-UK Biobank (UKB) subset of the gnomAD v4 exomes. This subset was previously only available in our downloadable files but is now available in the ["Dataset"](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/help/dataset-selection) toggle on gene, transcript, region, and variant pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of gnomAD v4.1, we have exposed the non-UK Biobank (non-UKB) subset of the gnomAD v4 exomes. This subset was previously only available in our downloadable files but is now available in the ["Dataset"](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/help/dataset-selection) toggle on gene, transcript, region, and variant pages.
```

Reviewer: Do you think we need to spell out that the genomes will stick around and the only the exome numbers update?

Example [variant](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/variant/1-55051215-G-GA?dataset=gnomad_r4_non_ukb):
![Screenshot showing variant page with non-UKB subset selected](../images/2024/non_ukb_variant.png "Non-UKB variant example")

### Supplementary REVEL files

> We used a combination of MANE select or canonical transcript information from Ensembl v105 and variant information (locus and alleles combination) to ascertain REVEL scores for variants in gnomAD v4.0 and v4.1 (exomes and genomes). However, REVEL was computed using Ensembl v64. This means that variants within 2,414 MANE select transcripts in gnomAD v4.0 and v4.1 are missing REVEL scores because they were present in Ensembl v105 but not in Ensembl v64.

Reviewer: The "combination of" and "or" reads a bit funny to me. Thoughts on a little reordering? 
```suggestion
We used a combination of transcript information, MANE select or canonical, from Ensembl v105 and variant information (locus and alleles combination) to ascertain REVEL scores for variants in gnomAD v4.0 and v4.1 (exomes and genomes). However, REVEL was computed using Ensembl v64. This means that variants within 2,414 MANE select transcripts in gnomAD v4.0 and v4.1 are missing REVEL scores because they were present in Ensembl v105 but not in Ensembl v64.
```

> To address this, we annotated the variants within the 2,414 genes with the maximum REVEL score found at the specific locus and allele, rather than the score for the MANE Select transcript. We have released two [TSVs](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/downloads#v4-resources); the exomes TSV adds REVEL scores to 1,936,321 out of 2,284,296 (87.77%) missense variants within the 2,414 genes. The genomes TSV adds REVEL scores to 528,204 out of 620,799 ( 85.08%) missense variants within the 2,414 genes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this, we annotated the variants within the 2,414 genes with the maximum REVEL score found at the specific locus and allele, rather than the score for the MANE Select or canonical transcript. We have released two [TSVs](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/downloads#v4-resources); the exomes TSV adds REVEL scores to 1,936,321 out of 2,284,296 (87.77%) missense variants within the 2,414 genes. The genomes TSV adds REVEL scores to 528,204 out of 620,799 (85.08%) missense variants within the 2,414 genes.
```
Not sure its necessary but being consistent

### Gene constraint metrics

> We reran the gene constraint metrics using gnomAD v4.1 frequencies and have updated the constraint table on the gene and transcript pages. Note that these updated metrics have the same caveats as the v4.0 metrics; for more details, please see our [blog post](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024-03-gnomad-v4-0-gene-constraint/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We regenerated the gene constraint metrics using gnomAD v4.1 frequencies and have updated the constraint table on the gene and transcript pages. Note that these updated metrics have the same caveats as the v4.0 metrics; for more details, please see our [blog post](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2024-03-gnomad-v4-0-gene-constraint/).
```

### Exome copy number variants
The exome copy number variants (CNVs) have been updated to include:

- Variant 193076__DUP relabeled as 16p12.2_DUP
- Refined annotation of 15q11 and 22q11 loci

> - Updated N_EXN_VAR and N_INT_VAR labels for size of events to be consistent with genic annotation used by short variant team

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Updated N_EXN_VAR and N_INT_VAR labels for size of events to be consistent with the genic annotation used by short variant team
```

- Updated sex karyotype terminology ("XX" and "XY" instead of "Male" and "Female")

> - SC (site count), SN (site number), and SF (site frequency) labels reformatted to match short variant VCF format (e.g., updating "afr_SC" to "SC_afr")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SC (site count), SN (site number), and SF (site frequency) labels reformatted to match the short variant VCF format (e.g., updating "afr_SC" to "SC_afr")
```

### Genome structural variants

> The genome structural variants (SV) have been updated to include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The genome structural variants (SVs) have been updated to include:
```
To be consistent with CNVs above and below

- Genotype information for multiallelic CNVs (mCNVs)
- Updated genetic ancestry (e.g., "Other" to "Remaining") and sex karyotype terminology (same as CNVs above)

> - Updated gene annotations (using the same gene list as used for the short variants)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Updated gene annotations (using the same gene list used for the short variants)
```

> - Updated metric annotation order to match short variant VCF format (e.g., updating "nfe_AF" to "AF_nfe")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Updated metric annotation order to match the short variant VCF format (e.g., updating "nfe_AF" to "AF_nfe")
```
